2-16-2023 Notes - Economics

---

# Diminishing Marginal Returns
The more of something you consume, the less marginal utility you get each time. Marginal utility "wears down."

# Equilibrium
$$Q_S=Q_D$$
Determined by intersection of supply and demand curves (sets equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity).
Not where supply and demand are equal (those are uncorrelated)! While markets roughly stabilize around the equilibrum, they are constantly in flux.

If price is above the equilibrium, a surplus is created ($Q_S>Q_D$) and sellers reduce price (they'll have leftover product, be losing money; $\downarrow P, \downarrow Q_S, \uparrow Q_D$).

If price is below equilibrium, a shortage is created ($Q_D>Q_S$) and buyers will offer higher prices (people who *really* it will pay more for it; $\uparrow P, \uparrow Q_S, \downarrow Q_D$).

# Surplus
The area below a demand curve shows the consumer's utility/value of the product. Right of the equilibrium it drops off. *Consumer surplus* is the area bounded by this area and the price line (above the price line), measuring how much more value consumers get (they were willing to pay X, but only have to pay Y, resulting in a consumer surplus of $X-Y$).

The area under the supply curve represents the cost of production for producers (as they produce more, it costs more, requiring higher prices). *Producer surplus* is the area bounded by the price line and the supply curve (below the price line), where producers were willing to only get X, but get paid Y.

# Efficiency
Market efficiency is when the value to consumers is equal to the cost of sellers, maximizing the total sum of consumer and producer surplus.
