2-21-2023 Notes - Economics

---

# Utility
A measure of a object's want satisfaction (also value; highly subjective and thus difficult to measure). Not related to "useful." Generally measured in "Utils." Can be negative.

Marginal and total (aggregate of marginals).



Under the law of diminishing marginal utility, utility decreases per each additional unit of consumption. At some point, it can even become negative. The point at which the marginal utility becomes 0 indicates the maximum total utility.

> Think of it in terms of derivatives. Marginal utility is the "derivative" of the total utility (roughly). The second derivative is always negative (due to diminishing marginal utility).

# Marginal
An adjective meaning *additional*, or *next*.

# Consumers
Always assume that consuemrs are rational and look to maximize their [[Utility]]. Consumers have limited *budgets* to spend on products.

# Utility-Maximizing Rule
The perfect combination of products to consume is where the *marginal utility* per dollar ($\frac{MU}{P}$) of each item is the same. $$\frac{MU_1}{P_1} = \frac{MU_2}{P_2} = \frac{MU_3}{P_3} ...  \frac{MU_n}{P_n}$$ When the marginal utility per dollar of multiple products is the same, it doesn't matter which one you pick.

# Income Effect
As income changes, consumption levels change. More income allows for greater consumption, less income means less consumption (for *normal goods*). *Inferior goods* go the opposite way.

# Substitution Effet
As one item's price lowers, it gains a greater marginal utility per dollar, so people consume more of it. The same applies in the other way.
